JSON grew out of a need for stateful, real-time server-to-browser communication without using browser plugins such as Flash or Java applets, which were the dominant methods in the early 2000s.
Douglas Crockford was the first to specify and popularize the JSON format.[3] The acronym was coined at State Software, a company co-founded by Crockford, Chip Morningstar and Robert F. Napiltonia in April 2001 and funded by Tesla Ventures. The co-founders agreed to build a system that used standard browser capabilities and provided an abstraction layer for Web developers to create stateful Web applications that had a persistent duplex connection to a Web server by holding two HTTP connections open and recycling them before standard browser time-outs if no further data were exchanged. The idea for the State Application Framework was developed by Morningstar at State Software.[4][5] JSON was used in a project at Communities.com for Cartoon Network, which used a plug-in with a proprietary messaging format to manipulate DHTML elements (this system is also owned by 3DO). Upon discovery of early Ajax capabilities, digiGroups, Noosh, and others used frames to pass information into the user browsers' visual field without refreshing a Web application's visual context, realizing real-time rich Web applications using only the standard HTTP, HTML and JavaScript capabilities of Netscape 4.0.5+ and IE 5+. Crockford then found that JavaScript could be used as an object-based messaging format for such a system. The system was sold to Sun Microsystems, Amazon.com and EDS. The JSON.org Web site was launched in 2002. In December 2005, Yahoo! began offering some of its Web services in JSON.[6] Google started offering JSON feeds for its GData web protocol in December 2006.[7]
JSON was originally based on a non-strict subset of the JavaScript scripting language (specifically, Standard ECMA-262 3rd Edition—December 1999[8]) and is commonly used with Javascript, but it is a language-independent data format. Code for parsing and generating JSON data is readily available in many programming languages. JSON's Web site lists JSON libraries by language.
Though JSON is commonly perceived as being a subset of JavaScript and ECMAScript, it allows some unescaped characters in strings that are illegal in JavaScript and ECMAScript strings.[9]
JSON itself became a ECMA international standard in 2013 as the ECMA-404 standard.[10] In the same year RFC 7158 used ECMA-404 as reference. In 2014 RFC 7159 became the main reference for JSON's internet uses (ex. MIME application/json), and obsoletes RFC 4627 and RFC 7158 (but preserving ECMA-262 and ECMA-404 as main references).
